

Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam is the current prime minister of Mauritius for the fourth time following the 2024 general election, after the landslide victory of his coalition Alliance du Changement.[1][2] He is a prominent figure in the political history of Mauritius, having served multiple terms as the Prime Minister of the country. He is also the leader of the Labour Party (Mauritius).[3]

Following former prime minister Pravind Jugnauth's resignation, Ramgoolam officially sworned as Prime Minister at the State House of Mauritius in the Mauritian President, Prithvirajsing Roopun.[4][5]

He served as Prime Minister for the first time from December 1995 until September 2000 and then became Leader of the Opposition again from October 2000 to 4 July 2005.
On 5 July 2005, he became prime minister for a second term after his coalition, Alliance Sociale, won the general elections. He was re-elected Prime Minister in 2005, serving till 2014.[6]

Navin Ramgoolam was born in an Indo-Mauritian family on 14 July 1947 to Seewoosagur Ramgoolam (SSR) and Sushil Ramjoorawon at their Desforges Street residence in Port Louis. SSR was the 6th Governor General of Mauritius, as well as the first Chief Minister and Prime Minister of Mauritius. In the 1800s, his ancestors migrated to Mauritius from Harigaon in Bhojpur district, Bihar. Immigration records indicate that these Coolies belonged to the backward Kurmi or to the even lower caste known as Koeri.[7] He attended the Royal College Curepipe from 1960 to 1966 and proceeded to study medicine in Ireland between 1968 and 1975, where he obtained the LRCP&SI licentiates from the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland and the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. Soon afterwards Ramgoolam was arrested in May 1978 by British Police for dangerous driving, and for driving whilst drunk.[8] On 8 July 1979 Ramgoolam married Veena Brizmohun,[9] a Mauritian who grew up in England and was studying social sciences at the University of London. The wedding ceremony, held at Cinema BDC in Quatre Bornes, was attended by Governor General Dayendranath Burrenchobay, opposition leader Anerood Jugnauth, and others. The newly-wed couple returned to London where Veena planned to complete her studies, and her husband wanted to specialise in cardiology.[10]

Navin Ramgoolam's early life was marked by significant personal and professional transitions. In December 1985, following the death of his father, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, the first Prime Minister of Mauritius.[11] Ramgoolam was on the verge of emigrating to Canada, however, he was persuaded by Sir Satcam Boolell, then leader of the Labour Party, and Paul Bérenger, leader of the Mauritian Militant Movement, to return to Mauritius. They encouraged him to assume the leadership of the Labour Party with the aim of forming a political alliance to challenge Anerood Jugnauth in the upcoming general elections.

During this period, Ramgoolam worked as a medical doctor at Dr A.G. Jeetoo Hospital in Mauritius from 1985 to 1987. In 1987, he moved to the United Kingdom to pursue legal studies at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), part of the University of London. After completing his LLB degree in 1990, he returned to Mauritius and became the leader of the Labour Party, subsequently contesting the 1991 general election as its candidate.[12]

The Labour Party and the MMM went on to forge an alliance to contest the 1995 elections. The alliance won all 60 directly elected seats from the mainland (with Labour taking 35 seats and the MMM 25). Ramgoolam became Prime Minister with Bérenger as his Deputy. The coalition soon fractured and Ramgoolam dismissed Bérenger in 1997. Bérenger then became Leader of the Opposition and Ramgoolam formed a one-party government.

Jugnauth and Bérenger formed a new alliance to contest the 2000 elections. Part of the agreement was to allow Jugnauth to serve for the first three years of the five-year term, then resign to assume the Presidency and allow Bérenger to complete his unexpired term. Ramgoolam, for his part, formed an alliance with the Mauritian Party of Xavier-Luc Duval (PMXD), a breakaway from the PMSD led by Xavier-Luc Duval, the son of Sir Gaëtan Duval. The MSM/MMM alliance won 54 of the 60 directly elected mainland seats. Ramgoolam, who had retained his own seat, became Leader of the Opposition.

His Alliance Social won the general elections against the MSM/MMM outgoing government. He was again appointed as prime minister with a majority of 38 out of 60 seats. His alliance also won the local/municipal elections in 2006 where the MSM/MMM was severely defeated. These consecutive defeats and internal instability caused the break-up of the MSM/MMM coalition.

As the MSM had more seats than the MMM and Pravind Jugnauth was not elected, Nando Bodha was appointed as Leader of the Opposition.

With the 2010 elections approaching, Ramgoolam decided in 2008 to support Jugnauth for re-election as President, to forestall a possible return by Jugnauth to parliamentary politics, where Ramgoolam viewed him as a potential threat. Jugnauth's condition for accepting the offer was an alliance between the Labour Party and the MSM. At Ramgoolam's insistence, the Alliance de L'Avenir also included the PMSD, into which the PMXD, and its leader, Xavier-Luc Duval, had merged; seven of the sixty parliamentary candidates would come from the PMSD).

The Alliance de L'Avenir won 41 of the 60 directly elected seats. Ramgoolam remained Prime Minister and Pravind Jugnauth, son of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, became his Deputy. Following the involvement of some members of the MSM in the Medpoint Scandal, however, Ramgoolam dismissed the MSM from the government.

The general elections originally scheduled for 2015 were brought forward to December 2014. The Labour Party made a new alliance with the MMM, proposing a constitutional amendment to upgrade the Presidency to a less ceremonial role. Ramgoolam and Bérenger, the MMM leader, claimed that the election was a referendum on the proposal, which they called the Second Republic. If the alliance won more than 45 of the 60 directly elected mainland seats, the Constitution would be amended; Ramgoolam would run for the Presidency and Bérenger would succeed him as Prime Minister.

Ramgoolam and Berenger were opposed by the MSM-led Alliance Lepep, which also included the PMSD, which had been Ramgoolam's coalition partner, and a new party called Muvman Liberater, formed by a significant portion of ex-members of the MMM who were opposed to the idea of giving Ramgoolam more powers. The Alliance Lepep, which opposed the proposal for the Second Republic, won 47 seats out of 60. The Labour-MMM alliance won only 13 seats, 9 from the MMM and 4 from the Labour Party. Ramgoolam lost his seat for the first time in his political career. On 12 December 2014, he resigned as Prime Minister of Mauritius.

The general election was scheduled on 10 November 2024, where the Labour Party together with the MMM, Nouveau Démocrate and Rezistans ek Alternativ formed the "Alliance du changement", to oppose the "Alliance Lepep" which composed of the MSM, Muvman Liberater and the PMSD. The Alliance du changement won the general election with a 60–0 in its favour.[13]

Navin Ramgoolam was arrested in London on 24 May 1978, during his time as a student at University College London. According to records from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), he was apprehended in the Soho area and subsequently tested for alcohol levels. The test indicated that he was driving under the influence, and he was later fined after pleading guilty to driving with excess alcohol. This incident resulted in a fine at Marlborough Street Magistrates' Court.[14]

In February 2015, Navin Ramgoolam was arrested in connection with multiple charges, including conspiracy and money laundering, as part of an investigation into the 2011 robbery and murder case known as the Roches-Noires Affair. The case was part of a broader probe into financial and criminal activities. At the time of his arrest, Ramgoolam was serving as the Prime Minister of Mauritius, and the incident garnered significant media attention both domestically and internationally. Ramgoolam has stated that the charges against him were politically motivated, a claim that has been debated publicly. The legal proceedings surrounding these allegations attracted considerable public and political discourse.[15][16][17]

Ramgoolam has received several accolades and honours. In 1998 he was made an Honorary Fellow of the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), Dr Honoris Causa by the University of Mauritius, Dr Honoris Causa from Aligarh Muslim University, India and Dr Honoris Causa by the Jawaharlal Nehru University, India in October 2005. Other awards he attained are the Grand Officier de la Legion d'Honneur from France in March 2006, the Honorary Freeman of Rodrigues from Rodrigues Regional Assembly in March 2007, The Wilberforce Medal from Wilberforce Lecture Trust, Hull, United Kingdom in June 2007, The Rajiv Gandhi Award from Mumbai Regional Congress Committee, India in August 2007, The Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award from Government of the Republic of India in January 2008 as well as Grand Commander of the Order of the Star and Key of the Indian Ocean (GCSK) from the Government of the Republic of Mauritius in March 2008. In Paris, Ramgoolam received the Prix Louise Michel, awarded generally each year to a high personality in recognition of his or her outstanding contribution in the political field. He was made Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa) by the Padmashree Dr D. Y. Patil University, Mumbai, India in February 2009, Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians (FRCP) of the Royal College of Physicians, London in May 2009, Honorary Doctor by Staffordshire University, United Kingdom in July 2010, Order of the Rule of Law by the World Jurist Association, Bethesda, Maryland, USA in April 2011, Overseas Bencher by the Inner Temple, United Kingdom in April 2011 and Doctor of Laws (Honoris Causa) by the Kurukshetra University, Haryana, India in February 2012.[19]


