

Orbital is a 2023 genre-blending novel by English writer Samantha Harvey that incorporates elements of science fiction, literary fiction, and philosophical drama,[3][4] published by Jonathan Cape in the UK and by Grove Atlantic in the US. It follows six fictional astronauts over 24 hours on the International Space Station, while including speculative interludes featuring an alien, a robot, and a prehistoric human.

The novel was well received by critics. It won the 2024 Booker Prize[5][6] and the Hawthornden Prize,[7][8] and it was shortlisted for the Orwell Prize for Political Fiction[9] and the Ursula K. Le Guin Prize for imaginative fiction.[10]

Harvey watched a continuous live stream of Earth from the International Space Station while writing the novel. She initially started work on the novel in the 2010s. However, she stopped writing after about 5,000 words, as she was experiencing feelings of inadequacy regarding her limited knowledge of the complex subject matter of space travel. Harvey told the BBC that she stopped writing as she thought, "Well, I have never been to space. I could never go to space ... Who am I to do this?" However, Harvey restarted writing and completed the novel in 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, when she stopped worrying about "trespassing in space".[11][12]

In an interview, Harvey stated that her goal was to write the novel as a "space pastoral", focusing on realism and the beauty of space rather than the speculative nature of science fiction.[13]

The novel, told over the course of 24 hours, follows six fictional astronauts and cosmonauts from Japan, the United States, Britain, Italy, and Russia, four men and two women, aboard the International Space Station as they orbit Earth. In addition to detailing the official duties and tasks of the astronauts aboard the spacecraft, the novel also features their reflections about humanity and subjects including the existence or nature of God, the meaning of life and existential threats such as climate change. The novel briefly shifts perspective to include the narrative of an alien, a robot, and a prehistoric human sailing on the sea. Each chapter of the novel covers a single 90-minute orbit around Earth, with 16 orbits in the 24 hours.

Writing for The New York Times, Joshua Ferris said that the position of the astronauts high above the Earth, their relative isolation from the rest of humanity, gave their reflections, their "transporting riffs, those fine rhapsodies!" a new clarity, uncorrupted from biases, tribalism and conflict as present on Earth.[14] In The Guardian, Alexandra Harris also stated that the astronauts' introspection and meditation on humanity was the strength of the novel: "The beauty of the book is at work less in its explicit hymns of praise than deep in its rhythms and structures. And it's here that some of the most compelling thinking goes on – about the spectacular and the ordinary, distance and intimacy."[1] Writing in the Los Angeles Times, Bethanne Patrick said that in featuring the six characters in such close proximity to one another, the work seeks to promote humans' mutual dependence. Patrick concluded: "Harvey manages to bring readers back down to Earth, astounded that they've traveled so far in such a short period of time, having finished their own orbit through the realms of her rich imagination."[15]

Writing for The New Yorker, James Wood stated that the novel contained only a rudimentary plot, however the plot was not the aim of the novel. Wood stated that Harvey's prose vividly portrayed the experience of being in space including the exhilaration of spacewalks; seeing entire continents under your feet whilst hurtling through space at 16,000 miles per hour. He explained that using the English language to describe life in space would be difficult but Harvey was able to do so. Wood also commended Harvey for using the vastness of space, the Earth and the astronauts' own lives to explore metaphysical concepts.[16]

The novel won the 2024 Booker Prize for the best novel written in English and published in the United Kingdom or Ireland. Artist Edmund de Waal, chair of the judges, said that Harvey's writing transformed the Earth into "something for contemplation, something deeply resonant".[11] With the win, Harvey became the first woman to win the Booker Prize since 2019, when the award was shared by Margaret Atwood and Bernadine Evaristo. The novel was the best selling book of the shortlisted works prior to winning the award.[17] Harvey had previously been nominated for the Booker Prize with the longlisting of her 2009 debut novel The Wilderness.[17] At 136 pages, Orbital was the second shortest novel to be awarded the Booker Prize (with the shortest novel being Penelope Fitzgerald's 1979 winning work Offshore).[17] With the 2024 win, the work became the first novel set in space to win the prestigious award.[17] Sara Collins, who was on the judging panel for the award, stated that the book transported her from the many crises on Earth and re-framed those crises, and humanity, in a new relief. Collins stated that the judging panel unanimously chose the work for the award, while concluding: "This is a book we need now, but it may also be a book we'll need forever."[18]
