

These are monthly timelines of the Red Sea crisis, which began on 19 October 2023.

On 8 October 2023, the day after the Hamas attack on Israel, U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin directed the Gerald R. Ford carrier strike group to the Eastern Mediterranean in response. Along with the aircraft carrier USS Gerald R. Ford, the group includes the cruiser Normandy, and the destroyers Carney, Ramage, Roosevelt and Thomas Hudner.[1]

On 19 October 2023 Carney intercepted three cruise missiles and eight drones launched by the Houthi militants in Yemen.[2][3] While the real targets of the cruise missiles and drones were uncertain, the missiles and drones were shot down by Carney as the missiles and the drones were headed north along the Red Sea in the direction of Israel during the 2023 Israel–Hamas war.[4] Reports showed that Carney actually encountered a larger and more sustained barrage than was previously known on that day after it shot down four cruise missiles and 15 drones over a period of nine hours.[5]

On 8 November 2023 an American MQ-9 Reaper was shot down off the coast of Yemen in the Red Sea by Houthi forces. Deputy Pentagon Press Secretary Sabrina Singh later stated in a press conference that the Houthis later attempted to recover the drone but that the Pentagon believed that they would be unable to recover anything of significance and that U.S. forces were not looking to recover it themselves.[6]

On 22 November 2023 Thomas Hudner shot down multiple drones launched by Houthi groups. On 26 November 2023 Houthi forces tried to seize an Israeli-affiliated ship near the coast of Yemen.[7]

On 3 December 2023 Carney and civilian-owned commercial ships were attacked in international waters in the southern Red Sea, with anti-ship ballistic missiles fired from Yemen by Iranian-backed Houthi rebels.[8] Missiles struck three commercial ships, while Carney shot down three drones in self-defense during the hours-long assault.[9] The United States Central Command said: "We ... have every reason to believe that these attacks, while launched by the Houthis in Yemen, are fully enabled by Iran.[10][11]

On 7 December 2023 the US announced it would impose sanctions on 13 individuals and entities whom it claimed are funding the Houthis.[12]

On 14 December 2023 Mohammad Reza Ashtiani, Defense Minister of Iran, said that any naval coalition formed by the US would face major problems.[7]

On 16 December 2023, while operating in the Red Sea, Carney successfully shot down a barrage of 14 unmanned aerial system (UAS) one-way attack drones launched from Houthi-controlled areas of Yemen.[13][14]

Also on 16 December, Hong Kong shipping company OOCL announced that it had suspended its shipments in and out of Israel, due to the surging threat of attack on commercial ships while traversing the Red Sea.[15]

On 19 December 2023 US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin announced that the US had formed a coalition of ten nations who would send ships to assist in fighting against attacks on shipping in the Red Sea.

On 21 December 2023, Defence Minister of Greece Nikos Dendias announced in a televised address that Greece will join the US-led coalition.[16]

On 21 December 2023, the US announced that more than twenty countries have joined the coalition.

On 25 December 2023, the US carried out air strikes against Iran-backed groups in Iraq.[17]

On 26 December 2023, the Indian Navy sent the destroyers INS Kochi and Kolkata to the Gulf of Aden, in response to an attack on a cargo vessel near the coast of India.[18][19]

On 28 December 2023, sanctions were imposed upon several entities by the US Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, which said that these entities had helped to convey financial aid from Iran to Houthi forces located in the region of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.[20]

On 31 December 2023, the container ship Maersk Hangzhou issued distress call after coming under attack from four Iran-backed small Houthi ships. Several shots were fired at the Maersk Hangzhou and attempts to board were made. However, a contracted security team aboard the container ship returned fire and defended Maersk Hangzhou.The aircraft carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower and destroyer USS Gravely responded to the distress call as part of Operation Prosperity Guardian. Verbal commands were issued to the four small ships, and helicopters from the Dwight D. Eisenhower were dispatched. After taking small arms fire, US Navy helicopters returned fire, sinking three of the small ships. There was no damage to US equipment or personnel.[21]

On 10 January 2024, the UK defence secretary stated that UK and US naval forces pushed back the largest attack to date from Houthi rebels.[22]

On 12 January 2024, the Islamic Resistance in Iraq said that if Yemen is attacked by the US and UK, "we will attack the Americans' base with everything in our power".[23] This attack was the beginning of Operation Poseidon Archer [simple].

The following tables largely cover the maritime engagements of the Iranian-backed[24] Houthi militants in support of the Hamas-led coalition in the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, and of the Palestinian cause more generally.[25][26]

Languedoc

 French Navy

UAV strike

UAV strike

The United States Navy claimed that between 3 and 8 p.m. (Sanaa time), the USS Laboon (DDG 58) which was patrolling in the Southern Red Sea as part of operation prosperity guardian shot down four unmanned aerial drones originating from Houthi-controlled areas in Yemen that were inbound to the USS Laboon. There were reportedly no injuries or damage in this incident. 

Struck by a one-way attack UAV; no injuries reported. Indian crew of 25.

Attempted piracy

 Royal Navy

Maersk Chesapeake
USS Gravely


 USN

Owner, British firm Suntech Maritime. Operators, Singapore-based Trafigura and London-based Oceonix Services.  Struck 60 nautical miles (110 km) south-east of Aden; tank of licit Russian naptha ignites (third vessel to have been attacked which had previously called at a Russian port). The fire was extinguished with the aid of INS Visakhapatnam, alongside US and French navy vessels. No injuries were reported in the almost entirely Indian crew (one Bangladeshi).

Targeted by three anti-ship ballistic missiles while traversing the Gulf of Aden. Minor damage was reported from a nearby explosion, but the crew was unharmed, the second missile missed and the third was claimed by the US to have been shot down by USS Laboon. Greek-owned and operated bulk carrier; owned by Star Bulk, and carrying coal en route to India from the United States.

Houthis fired two missiles at the bulk carrier while she traversed south of the Bab el-Mandeb strait. The attack caused minor damage but the crew was unharmed. Greek-owned vessel; operated by Star Bulk, came from Brazil and was en route to Bandar Khomeini, Iran.

An explosion took place 100 nautical miles (190 km; 120 mi) east of Aden near the bulk carrier, causing minor shrapnel damage. A diesel fuel leak reportedly took place after shrapnel struck a generator pipe; no injuries were reported. Managed by the Greece-based Helikon Shipping Enterprises, she was en route to Suez Port from Singapore.

Targeted by a missile from Yemen which struck her port side, causing minor damage. The incident occurred 72 nautical miles (133 km; 83 mi) northwest of Mokha, and the crew was unharmed. The oil tanker, which the Houthis claimed was British, came from Novorossiysk, Russia and was carrying crude oil bound for Paradeep, India. She is owned by Oceanfront Maritime Co and managed by Sea Trade Marine. Another tanker 3 nautical miles (5.6 km; 3.5 mi) northeast of the Pollux altered her course to move away from the struck vessel after the incident. The US claims that 3 more missiles were launched by the Houthis that day with at least 2 of them targetting Pollux, but they all missed.

Crew: 11 Syrians, six Egyptians, three Indian nationals, and four Filipinos. British-registered and Lebanese-operated. She hailed from Khorfakkan, UAE and was bound for Varna, Bulgaria, with a cargo of  21,999 metric tons of International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) code class 5.1 fertilizer deemed "very dangerous" by the  Djibouti Port Authority.[133]  CENTCOM reported the attack caused her to take on water, leaving behind a 29 kilometres (18 mi) oil slick and leading to an environmental disaster. Sinks in Gulf of Aden at approximately 2:15 a.m. AST (UTC+3) after 12 days of abandonment and drifting approximately 37 nautical miles (69 km) northwards, dragging anchor and leaking heavy fuel oil, in the first such loss of the crisis. Attempts at salvage, etc. had been precluded by political and security factors.

Houthis claimed they directly hit the bulk carrier, but did not specify the damage or casualties caused. Ambrey later reported that she was struck by a drone and suffered minor damage. Houthis claimed she was American, but she is registered in the Marshall Islands and reportedly controlled by Andrea Organista D'Amato, a company incorporated in Switzerland. She came from India and was en route to Italy.

Two Houthi anti-ship missiles struck the cargo ship while she was traversing the Gulf of Aden, setting her ablaze. The incident occurred around 70 nautical miles (130 km; 81 mi) east of Aden. After the fire, the UKMTO reported that she suffered minor damage and her crew was safe. CENTCOM later made a statement announcing that the attack caused a minor injury and an unspecified amount of damage. Ambrey said that coalition military assets responded to the incident. The vessel was not named by the UKMTO, but analysts identified her as the Islander. She previously sent out messages reading "SYRIAN CREW ON BOARD" in an attempt to avoid being targeted by the Houthis. She came from Thailand and was bound for Egypt, and she is British-owned.

Set ablaze after being targeted by missiles 91 miles (146 km; 79 nmi) southeast of Aden while traversing the Gulf of Aden. Two explosions were reported, one off the container ship's port quarter and the other damaging her accommodation block. Her crew made efforts to extinguish the fire, and a distress call was made from the vessel. No injuries were reported within her crew of 23, 13 of which were Indian and all of whom were rescued by INS Kolkata. A 12-member firefighting team was dispatched to assist in extinguishing the fire, and her operators later confirmed that the incident caused minor damage. She was sailing for the Mediterranean Shipping Company and was linked to Israel, according to Ambrey. She came from Singapore and was en route to Djibouti.

Hailed over radio by the putative Yemeni Navy to change course before being struck by a missile 54 nautical miles (100 km; 62 mi) southwest of Aden at approximately 11:30 a.m. AST (UTC+3); a catastrophic fire ensued.  Her crew of 20 comprised one Indian, four Vietnamese, and 15 Filipinos, plus three armed guards (two from Sri Lanka and one from Nepal), most of whom entered lifeboats; she was promptly declared abandoned. Three were killed and at least four injured in the attack, making this the first fatal Houthi attack.[174]  A US warship and an Indian naval vessel were dispatched and the crew rescued by the Indians.[174] True Confidence is Barbados-flagged and Liberian-owned (the corporate owner being True Confidence Shipping SA), and operated by Third January Maritime Ltd, Greece; she had previously been owned by an American company. She sailed from Lianyungang, China and had been en route to Jeddah, Saudi Arabia with a cargo of trucks and steel products. 

 French Navy
 Royal Danish Navy
 United States Navy

Targeted by five or six anti-ship ballistic missiles in the Gulf of Aden, 23 nautical miles (43 km; 26 mi) west of Mokha. The Houthis initially fired four missiles in the direction of the oil tanker, and a fifth approximately twelve hours later.  (A sixth missile was launched, but it crashed in Yemen). This sole strike initiated a distress call, and caused a fire which was extinguished about half-an-hour later. She had reportedly been owned by the British shipping firm Union Maritime in 2019, but she had changed her registration details since, including her name and operator. At the time of the attack she was Chinese-owned and was carrying licit Russian crude oil to New Mangalore Port, India.

The second attack came in two missiles, both striking the crude oil tanker Andromeda Star and causing damage. The oil tanker was en route to Vadinar, India from Primorsk, Russia carrying licit Russian oil. The vessel had previously been British-owned, but in November 2023 was transferred to an owner registered in Seychelles. She had a crew of 30, including 22 Indians. INS Kochi came to her aid following the attack.

Targeted by a UAV in the Arabian Sea around 170 nautical miles (310 km; 200 mi) south of Socotra, or 400 nautical miles (740 km; 460 mi) off the coast of mainland Yemen, the container ship was directly struck, making it the Houthis' furthest attack so far and first successful one in the Indian Ocean, which they had targeted several times. Debris from the UAV was found aboard the ship, and she was reported to have sustained minor damage with her crew uninjured. She was able to proceed to her next port of call without further issues. The attack indicated that the Houthis could have possibly extended the range of their drones as it occurred much further than their usual attacks. Houthis claimed responsibility for her attack on 29 April, around the time the details of it were released. Sister ship to MSC Aries, she was likely targeted for her "perceived Israeli affiliation", being associated with the Israeli-owned Zodiac Maritime, though she was operating on behalf of the Italy-based Mediterranean Shipping Company. She was en route to Salalah, Oman.

Targeted by three missiles around 54 nautical miles (100 km; 62 mi) northwest of Mokha, a Malta-flagged container ship suffered an unspecified amount of damage but was able to proceed to her next port of call. She was initially identified as CMA CGM Manta Ray, which is operated by the France-based CMA CGM and had been en route to Jeddah, Saudi Arabia from Djibouti. However, her operator said that she was at harbor in Djibouti at the time and could not have been targeted. Yahya Sarea spokesperson later claimed in a televised speech that the Houthis had struck the Greek-owned Cyclades in the Red Sea.

On 3 May 2024, the Houthi-aligned Yemeni Armed Forces SPC military spokesperson Yahya Saree announced the expansion of their campaign to the targeting of ships in the eastern Mediterranean bound for Israel. in a televised speech, Saree stated that "We will target any ships heading to Israeli ports in the Mediterranean Sea in any area we are able to reach".[250][251][252][253]
